feat(docs): add recipes section (#1133)
wasmCloud/wasmCloud.com: docs/recipes/expose-workload-via-kubernetes-service.mdx

---
title: 'Expose a Workload via Kubernetes Service'
description: 'Route cluster traffic to a workload through a Kubernetes Service and EndpointSlice'
---

> This recipe shows how to expose a wasmCloud workload to other services in your Kubernetes cluster using a standard Kubernetes Service. The operator manages an EndpointSlice that points to the host pods running the workload, so cluster-internal DNS (e.g. `my-service.default.svc.cluster.local`) resolves to the correct pods automatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This recipe shows how to expose a wasmCloud workload to other services in your Kubernetes cluster using a standard [Kubernetes Service](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/service). The operator manages [EndpointSlices](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/endpoint-slices/) that point to the host pods running the workload, so cluster-internal DNS (e.g. `my-service.default.svc.cluster.local`) resolves to the correct pods automatically.
```

> This recipe shows how to expose a wasmCloud workload to other services in your Kubernetes cluster using a standard Kubernetes Service. The operator manages an EndpointSlice that points to the host pods running the workload, so cluster-internal DNS (e.g. `my-service.default.svc.cluster.local`) resolves to the correct pods automatically.

Reviewer: can we clarify "the operator" w/ a link just early on in here in case someone drops onto this page directly?

> By the end, you will have a workload reachable by name from anywhere in the cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By the end, you will have a wasmCloud workload reachable by DNS name from anywhere in the cluster.
```

Maybe "wasmCloud workload" -> `WorkloadDeployment` and make that a link? or "wasmCloud WorkloadDeployment" ? Feels like just "workload" and "name" are too general

- [`kubectl`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/#kubectl)

## Overview

When you set `spec.kubernetes.service.name` (or `spec.template.spec.kubernetes.service.name` on a `WorkloadDeployment`) to the name of an existing Kubernetes Service, the operator:

1. Creates and maintains an EndpointSlice for that Service, pointing to the pod IPs of the hosts running the workload.
2. Registers Service DNS aliases (`my-service`, `my-service.default`, `my-service.default.svc`) with the host, so the host's HTTP router accepts requests whose `Host` header matches any of these forms.

This means you can call the workload from other pods by resolving its Service DNS name (short name or fully-qualified, in-cluster or cross-namespace), as long as the request's `Host` header is one of the registered aliases. Note that the fully-qualified `.cluster.local` form is **not** a registered alias — use it for DNS resolution only, and set the `Host` header to one of the shorter forms.

## Step 1: Create the Kubernetes Service

> Create a Service before deploying the workload. The operator references this Service by name and manages its EndpointSlice.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a Service before deploying the workload. The operator will reference this Service by name and manage its EndpointSlices.
```

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: hello-service
  namespace: default
spec:
  ports:
    - name: http
      port: 8080
      protocol: TCP
```

> Note that the Service does not include a `selector`. The operator manages the EndpointSlice directly, so no label matching is needed.

Reviewer: Should we use the `:::note` thing here? I'm also fine with this being prose.

Also, do we want to preface the section below with something like "To apply the resource above in one command line, use the following" or something like that? Fine if we don't because it matches the next section and people can probably put two and 2 together

- `hostInterfaces[].config.host: hello-service` registers the hostname with the wasmCloud host so it routes incoming HTTP requests on that hostname to this component.

```shell
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: runtime.wasmcloud.dev/v1alpha1
kind: WorkloadDeployment
metadata:
  name: hello-world
  namespace: default
spec:
  replicas: 1
  template:
    spec:
      hostSelector:
        hostgroup: default
      kubernetes:
        service:
          name: hello-service
      components:
        - name: hello-world
          image: ghcr.io/wasmcloud/components/hello-world:0.1.0
      hostInterfaces:
        - namespace: wasi
          package: http
          interfaces:
            - incoming-handler
          config:
            host: hello-service
EOF
```

## Step 3: Verify the EndpointSlice

Once the workload is running, confirm that the operator has created an EndpointSlice:

```shell
kubectl get endpointslices -l kubernetes.io/service-name=hello-service
```

You should see an EndpointSlice with endpoints pointing to the host pod IPs:

```text
NAME                     ADDRESSTYPE   PORTS   ENDPOINTS     AGE
hello-service-a46c2b39   IPv4          80      10.244.0.15   30s

> ```

Reviewer: So often in k8s-related docs people will make it extra explicit that the IPs that they see may not exactly match what is in their own setup.

I'm not sure we need to *keep* pointing out this kind of thing in 2026 but just bringing it up since I think I have seen that a lot

The `PORTS` column shows `80` — the port the wasmCloud host listens on inside the pod. Kube-proxy forwards traffic from the Service's front-facing port (`8080` in this example) to port `80` on the host pod. You do not need to set `targetPort` on the Service; the operator manages the EndpointSlice directly.

## Step 4: Call the workload from within the cluster

> From any pod in the cluster, the workload is now reachable via the Service DNS name. To test, run a one-off curl pod:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From any pod in the cluster, the workload is now reachable via the Service DNS name. 

To test that the workload can be reached, run a one-off curl pod:
```

A little wordy with the phrasing, but I like separating these a bit

```shell
kubectl run curl-test --rm -it --restart=Never --image=curlimages/curl -- \
  curl -s -H "Host: hello-service" http://hello-service:8080
```

> 

Reviewer: What do you think about moving the note about the Host header up to here?

We can still describe it down below (again) for a little repetition which I think might be good
